\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@smallbook
@c %**start of header
@setfilename dircond.info
@settitle Dircond User Manual
@c %**end of header
@setchapternewpage odd

@defcodeindex pr
@defcodeindex op
@defcodeindex kw
@defcodeindex fl

@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex op cp
@syncodeindex pr cp
@syncodeindex kw cp
@syncodeindex fl cp

@include version.texi

@ifinfo
@dircategory Individual utilities
@direntry
* dircond: (dircond).                Monitor changes in directories.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2013 Sergey Poznyakoff

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, and with Front-Cover and Back-Cover at your option.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License''.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title Dircond User Manual
@subtitle version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Sergey Poznyakoff.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifnothtml
@page
@summarycontents
@page
@end ifnothtml
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Dircond

This edition of the @cite{Dircond User Manual}, last updated @value{UPDATED},
documents Dircond Version @value{VERSION}.
@end ifnottex

@menu

* Intro::                   Introduction.
* Reporting Bugs::          How to Report a Bug.

Appendices

* Copying This Manual::  The GNU Free Documentation License.
* Concept Index::        Index of Concepts.

@detailmenu
@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Intro
@chapter Introduction

@c @node Overview
@c @chapter Overview of this Manual

@node Reporting Bugs
@chapter How to Report a Bug

Please, report bugs and suggestions to @email{gray+dircond@@gnu.org.ua}.

  You hit a bug if at least one of the conditions below is met:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{dircond} terminates on signal 11
(SIGSEGV) or 6 (SIGABRT).
@item The program fails to do its job as described in
this manual.
@end itemize

  If you think you've found a bug, please be sure to include maximum
information available to reliably reproduce it, or at least to analyze
it.  The information needed is:

@itemize
@item Version of the package you are using.
@item Command line options and configuration file.
@item Conditions under which the bug appears.
@end itemize

  Any errors, typos or omissions found in this manual also qualify as
bugs.  Please report them, if you happen to find any.

@node Copying This Manual
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

This is a general index of all issues discussed in this manual

@printindex cp

@bye



