.\" direvent - directory content watcher daemon -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2012-2014 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" Direvent is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
.\" Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your
.\" option) any later version.
.\"
.\" Direvent is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with direvent. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH DIREVENT 8 "September 1, 2014" "DIREVENT" "Direvent User Reference"
.SH NAME
direvent \- directory event monitor
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBdirevent\fR [\fB\-HVdfh\fR] [\fB\-F\fR \fINAME\fR]\
 [\fB\-P\fR \fIFILE\fR]\
 [\fB-l\fR \fIPRIO\fR]\
 [\fB-T\fR \fICOMMAND\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-debug\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-facility\fR=\fINAME\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-foreground\fB]\
 [\fB\-\-pidfile\fR=\fIFILE\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-self\-test\fR=\fICOMMAND\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-user\fR=\fINAME\fR]\
 [\fBCONFIG\fR]

.B direvent \-h
.br
.B direvent \-\-help

.B direvent \-H
.br
.B direvent \-\-config\-help

.B direvent \-\-usage

.B direvent \-V
.br
.B direvent \-\-version

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B GNU Direvent
monitors a set of directories on the file system and reacts when
a file system event occurs in any of them.  Directories and events
to monitor are specified in the configuration file.  When an event
occurs the utility reacts by invoking an external command configured
for that event.	
.PP
The following
.B generic
events can be monitored by the program:
.TP
.B create
A file was created;
.TP
.B delete
A file was deleted;
.TP
.B write
A file was written to;
.TP
.B attrib
File attributes have changed.  This includes changes in the file
ownership, mode, link count, etc.
.PP
Depending on the interface provided by the underlying operating system
.B direvent
can trace various
.B system-dependent
events, which may offer a better resolution.  These events are
described in the section
.B SYSTEM DEPENDENCIES
below.
.PP
A
.B watcher
is a configuration entity within
.B direvent
which associates a set of directories with a set of events and
instructs the program to run a specified external command when
any of these events occur in any of these directories.  This
external command (called a \fBhandler\fR) can obtain information
about the event that triggered its execution from the environment
variables, or from its command line (see the \fBHANDLER ENVIRONMENT\fR
section below).
.PP
Watchers are declared in the program configuration file
.BR direvent.conf ,
located in the system configuration directory (normally \fB/etc\fR).
.PP
An alternative configuration file can be used, by supplying its pathname
as the command line argument (\fICONFIG\fR parameter in the \fBSYNOPSIS\fR
section above).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug 
Increase debug verbosity level.
.TP
\fB\-F\fR, \fB\-\-facility=\fIFACILITY\fR
Log under this syslog facility.  Allowed values for \fIFACILITY\fR are
a decimal number or any of the following symbolic names:
.BR auth ,
.BR authpriv ,
.BR cron ,
.BR daemon ,
.BR ftp ,
.BR local0 " through " local7 ,
.BR lpr ,
.BR mail ,
.BR news ,
.BR user ,
and
.BR uucp .

The option \fB\-F 0\fR directs logging to the standard error.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-foreground 
Run in the foreground.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR \fIPRIO\fR
While connected to a terminal \fBdirevent\fR outputs its diagnostics
messages to stderr and, if configured, to \fBsyslog\fR.  This option
limits the amount of information output to the standard error.
\fIPRIO\fR is one of the following priorities (in order of increasing
severity):
.BR debug ,
.BR info ,
.BR notice ,
.BR warning ,
.BR err ,
.BR crit ,
.BR alert ,
.BR emerg .
When this option is given, only messages with the priority level equal
to or greater than \fIPRIO\fR will be duplicated on the standard error.
.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-pidfile=\fIFILE\fR
Write PID to \fIFILE\fR.
.TP
\fB\-T\fR, \fB\-\-self\-test=\fICOMMAND\fR
Run in \fIself-test mode\fR.  In this mode, \fBdirevent\fR starts
external command supplied as the argument to this option and continues
running until the command exits.  If the command terminates normally,
\fBdirevent\fR exits with the code returned by it.  If the command
terminates on \fBSIGHUP\fR, \fBdirevent\fR exits with code 0.  If it
terminates on another signal, \fBdirevent\fR exits with code 2.

\fICOMMAND\fR can include any command line options or arguments,
provided that it is properly quoted.  It is invoked as 
.BI "/bin/sh -c " COMMAND
in the environment of the parent \fBdirevent\fR process.

The macro variable
.B $self_test_pid
holds the PID of the \fICOMMAND\fR (see section
.B MACRO EXPANSION
in
.BR direvent.conf (5)).
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-lint 
Check configuration file for errors and exit.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-user=\fIUSER\fR
Run as this \fIUSER\fR.
.PP
Informative options cause the program to display the requested piece
of information and exit:
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help 
Output a terse help summary and exit.
.TP
.BR \-H ", " \-\-config\-help 
Describe configuration file syntax.
.TP
.B \-\-usage
Show available command line options.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print program version and copyright information.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The default configuration file is
.BR /etc/direvent.conf .
If a file name is supplied as an argument to the program, that file
will be read instead.
.PP
The configuration file syntax is discussed in detail in
.BR direvent.conf (5).
This section provides only a short description of it.
.PP
Three types of comments are allowed: inline comments, that begin with
a \fB#\fR or \fB//\fR and extend to the end of line, and multi-line
comments, which comprise everything enclosed between \fB/*\fR and
\fB*/\fR.  Comments and empty lines are ignored.  Whitespace
characters are ignored as well, except as they serve to separate
tokens.
.PP
A token is a string of consecutive characters from the following
classes: alphanumeric characters, underscores, dots, asteriscs,
slashes, semicolons, commercial at's, and dashes.
.PP
Any other sequence of characters must be enclosed in double quotation
marks in order to represent a single token.
.PP
Adjacent quoted strings are concatenated.
.PP
Configuration statements consist of a keyword and value separated by
any amount of whitespace and is terminated with a semicolon.  A block
statement is a collection of statements enclosed in curly braces.
.PP
The most important configuration statement is
.BR watcher .
It is defined as follows:
.sp
.nf
.in +2
.B watcher {
.in +4
\fBpath\fR \fIPATHNAME\fR [\fBrecursive\fR [\fILEVEL\fR]];
.BI "event " EVENT\-LIST ;
.BI "command " COMMAND\-LINE ;
.BI "user " NAME ;
.BI "timeout " NUMBER ;
.BI "environ " ENV\-SPEC ;
.BI "option " STRING\-LIST ;
.in -4
.B }
.in
.fi
.PP
Each \fBwatcher\fR statement instructs \fBdirevent\fR to monitor
the events listed in \fIEVENT\-LIST\fR occurring in the directories
specified by \fIPATHNAME\fRs in \fBpath\fR statements (any number of
\fBpath\fR statements can be given).  When any such event is detected,
the \fICOMMAND\-LINE\fR will be executed.
.PP
Each directory defined with the \fBrecursive\fR keyword will be
watched recursively.  This means that for each subdirectory created in
it, \fBdirevent\fR will install a watcher similar to that of its parent
directory.  The optional \fILEVEL\fR can be used to set up a cut-off
nesting level, beyond which the recursive operation is disabled.
.PP
The rest of statements are optional.  The \fBuser\fR statement can be
used to execute the \fICOMMAND\-LINE\fR as the user \fINAME\fR
(provided, of course, that \fBdirevent\fR is started with root
privileges).  The \fBtimeout\fR specifies the maximum amount of time
(in seconds) the command is allowed to run.  It defaults to 5.  The
\fBenviron\fR statement modifies the command environment (see the
following section).  Finally, the \fBoption\fR statement supplies
additional options.  It can be used, for example, to divert the
command's output to \fBsyslog\fR.
.PP
The program's logging is controlled by the \fBdebug\fR and
\fBsyslog\fR statements.
.TP
.BI "debug " NUMBER ;
Sets the debugging level to \fINUMBER\fR -- an integer value between 0
and 3.  Zero is the default and means the debugging is disabled.  The
bigger the \fINUMBER\fR the more detailed debugging information will
be output.
.PP
The \fBsyslog\fR statement controls the syslog logging:
.sp
.nf
.in +2
.B syslog {
.in +4
.BI "facility " STRING ;
.BI "tag " STRING ;
.BI "print\-priority " BOOL ;
.in -4
.B }
.PP
The \fBpidfile\fR statement instructs the program to write its PID to
the named file after disconnecting from the controlling terminal.
.SH "HANDLER ENVIRONMENT"
The handler to be executed on an event is defined by the \fBcommand\fR
statement in the \fBwatcher\fR configuration block (see
.BR direvent.conf (5)).
Before executing, the following operations are performed:
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step].
The current working directory is set to the directory where the event
occurred.
.IP \n+[step].
If the \fBenviron\fR statement is present in the watcher, the
environment is modified according to its rules.  See the description
of the \fBenviron\fR statement in
.BR direvent.conf (5).
.IP \n+[step].
The standard input is closed.
.IP
If the \fBstdout\fR option is supplied,
the standard output is captured and redirected to the \fBsyslog\fR.
Otherwise it is closed.
.IP
If the \fBstderr\fR option is supplied,
the standard error is captured and redirected to the \fBsyslog\fR.
Otherwise it is closed.
.IP
All file descriptors above 2 are closed.
.IP \n+[step].
\fBMacro variables\fR are expanded.  See the section
.B MACRO EXPANSION
in
.BR direvent.conf (5).
For example, if the handler is about to be executed for the
\fBwrite\fR event on the file \fBsomefile\fR, and the \fBcommand\fR
definition was:
.RS
.sp
.nf
.in +4
command "/libexec/handler \-e '$genev_name' \-f '$file'";
.in
.fi
.RE
.IP
then the resulting command line will be:
.RS
.sp
.nf
.in +4
/libexec/handler \-e 'open' \-f 'somefile'
.in
.fi
.RE
.IP \n+[step].
Word splitting is performed on the resulting command line.  The first
word is treated as the pathname of the program to be executed.
.IP \n+[step].
The program is invoked.
.SH "SYSTEM DEPENDENCIES"
\fBDirevent\fR relies on the event monitoring API provided by the
kernel.
.SH Linux
On \fBLinux\fR the program uses
.BR inotify (7).
.PP
The maximum number of watches a user process can have is controlled by
the
.B fs.inotify.max_user_watches
system variable.  Normally it is set to 8192, which is quite enough
for most purposes.  However, if you monitor a big number or
directories and/or are using recursive watchers, you may need more
watches.  In that case, use
.BR sysctl (8)
to raise the limit, e.g.:
.sp
.nf
.in +4
sysctl \-w fs.inotify.max_user_watches=16384
.in
.fi
.PP
Most GNU/Linux distributions provide the file
.B /etc/sysctl.conf
which can be used to set this variable on startup.
.PP
The following system-dependent events are defined on systems that use
.BR inotify (7):
.TP
.B ACCESS
A file was accessed.
.TP
.B ATTRIB
A file's metadata changed.
.TP
.B CLOSE_WRITE
A writable file was closed.
.TP
.B CLOSE_NOWRITE
An unwritable file closed.
.TP
.B CREATE
A file was created.
.TP
.B DELETE
A file was deleted.
.TP
.B MODIFY
A file was modified.
.TP
.B MOVED_FROM
A file was moved into a monitored directory.
.TP
.B MOVED_TO
A file was moved out from a monitored directory.
.TP
.B OPEN
A file was opened.
.SH BSD
When compiled on \fBBSD\fR systems (including \fBDarwin\fR),
\fBdirevent\fR uses
.BR kqueue (2).
This interface needs an open file handle for each file in a monitored
directory, which means that the number of watchers is limited by the
maximum number of open files.  Use
.BI "ulimit -n " NUM
to raise it to a higher number.
.PP
Since it operates on files, \fBkqueue\fR does not provide direct
support for the \fBcreate\fR generic event.  \fBDirevent\fR works
over this disadvantage by keeping track of the contents of each
monitored directory and rescanning it each time a \fBWRITE\fR system
event is reported for it.  It then generates the
\fBopen\fR event for each file that appeared after the last scan.
Such a rescan can consume considerable time if a directory has a very
large number of files in it.
.PP
The following system-dependent events are available:
.TP
.B DELETE
The \fBunlink()\fR system call was called on the monitored file.
.TP
.B WRITE
A write occurred on the file.
.TP
.B EXTEND
The file was extended.
.TP
.B ATTRIB
The file attributes have changed.
.TP
.B LINK
The link count on the file changed.
.TP
.B RENAME
The file was renamed.
.TP
.B REVOKE
Access to the file was revoked via
.BR revoke (2)
or the underlying file system was unmounted.
.SH Darwin
Essentially the same as
.BR BSD .
The main difference compared to \fBLinux\fR and \fBBSD\fR is that on
\fBDarwin\fR the watchers are set after disconnecting from the
controlling terminal, because \fBDarwin\fR lacks the
.BR rfork (2)
call and the event queue cannot be inherited by the child process.
.SH "EXIT CODE"
.IP 0
Successful termination.
.IP 1
Command line usage error.
.IP 2
Another error occurred.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR direvent.conf (5),
.BR inotify (7),
.BR kqueue (2).
.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug-direvent@gnu.org.ua>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2012, 2013 Sergey Poznyakoff
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:

